“Potenziale strategisch entfalten” – Template 
Max. 30 pages excl. executive summary and implementation schedule; font size 11 pt, line spacing 1.5. The tentative page numbers of the sections 1-4 are not binding. You are free to add a title page and a table of contents.
1. Executive Summary (1 page)
2. SWOT Analysis / Self Report (ca. 5 pages)
The University of Applied Sciences Emden/Leer (UASEL) originated from the University of Applied Sciences Ostfriesland, was founded in 1973 with the mission to provide access to higher education for the people in the region, to train academic professionals for the region and beyond, and to make a significant contribution to innovation-driven regional development. Currently, approximately 4,000 students are enrolled in 42 study programs (13 of which are master's programs). In addition to 118 professors, the UASEL employs 461 staff members. In recent years, 18 new professors have been appointed, with the average age of the professors being 52 years. Following a period of growth in number of students and researchers, the UASEL is now entering a phase of stabilization, so only a small number of new appointments of new professors are expected in the coming years.
The UASEL is divided into four faculties. With 59 professorships, the Faculty of Technology is the largest at the university. It consists of three departments: Electrical Engineering and Computer Science (28 professorships), Mechanical Engineering (16 professorships), and Natural Sciences (15 professorships). The faculties are followed by the Faculty of Business Studies (29 professorships), the Faculty of Social Work and Health (21 professorships), and the Faculty of Maritime Sciences (9 professorships) in terms of the number of professors.
The university's strategy is derived from the mission statement developed about 10 years ago through a participatory process. A distinction is made between comprehensive and profile-forming elements (see Figure 1).

Figure 1  Strategic development areas 
Campus university: The UASEL is characterized by an approachable, appreciative, and personal atmosphere. People are at the center, creating a high level of identification with the institution across departmental boundaries. This mindset can be utilized for interdisciplinary collaboration.
University offers regional incentives: The Ems-Dollart region aims to promote joint innovation- and knowledge-driven regional development. Together with the region, the UASEL has agreed on innovation fields that are highly relevant to regional companies and institutions and align with the university's competence profile. This alignment is reflected in the university's research focuses and study programs.
Social responsibility and sustainability: The members of the UASEL take on social responsibility and align their actions with the UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). As a regional impulse provider, institutionalized initiatives such as "greentech OSTFRIESLAND" demonstrate the university's special responsibility to embed sustainability in the region.
Internationality: The international exchange of staff and students, joint teaching programs with foreign universities, and international research collaborations are key drivers for the inter- and transdisciplinary development of the UASEL. In addition to intensive contacts with neighboring Netherlands, European collaborations, mainly in Southern and Eastern Europe, are a focal point.
Interdisciplinarity: As is typical for universities of applied sciences, the professors possess both high technical expertise and practical professional experience, making them particularly well-qualified for inter- and transdisciplinary collaboration ("T-shaped researcher"). The UASEL, with its complementary faculties, is well-positioned to examine sustainable transformation pathways from various disciplinary perspectives. Coupled with a strong focus on applied research, this approach addresses the systemic complexity of sustainability transformation and enables multi-dimensional problem-solving for specific practical cases.
Gender equality: A gender-equitable university culture promotes dealing with the increasing diversity of students, opens perspectives, and counteracts (unconscious) bias. The UASEL sees itself as particularly responsible for paying attention to gender equality, especially in new appointments and in the qualification of academic young talent. The established family service and the certificate "Family-Friendly University" play an important role in this regard.
Digitalization: Catalyzed by the accelerated technological development in the field of digitalization, new tools, opportunities, and risks arise in the use of these technologies (e.g., VR/AR, Metaverse, AI). The UASEL contributes significantly to the responsible handling of this new potential through corresponding development and reflective use.
Based on the Potential Analysis of the Scientific Committee Niedersachsen (WKN), regional knowledge and technology transfer (including with neighboring Netherlands) has come into focus in recent years. The guiding principle here is the “Transferbarometer” of the Stifterverband, which was implemented at the UASEL as a "Transferkompass" in an joined project with the Stifterverband. Several projects and networks were established or realigned in this context:
 Cross-border Transfer Centers: These are linked to the university's research priorities. The existing expertise and infrastructure are leveraged for the region's innovation beyond individual projects. At the same time, the centers establish the UASEL as a driver of social transformation in the region and as a place of social interaction and social innovation. Funded by the program, the Transfer Center for Sustainable Mobility (financed through "Innovation at Universities of Applied Sciences") and the Transfer Center for Health and Prevention have been established. Closely linked to this is the Innosys-Nordwest project (together with Jade University of Applied Sciences and the University of Oldenburg), which has established an online marketplace for knowledge transfer.
 greentech OSTFRIESLAND Network: A knowledge and exchange network of academic institutions and companies created to support environmentally friendly technologies.
 Innovative Ostfriesland Initiative: A network initiated by the UASEL with a broader thematic focus to promote the networking of innovation leaders in the region.
 Green Shipping Competence Center (together with Jade University of Applied Sciences): Focused on the maritime economy, developing innovative solutions for alternative ship propulsion, logistics, and simulation. Additionally, a knowledge network is maintained, and events are offered based on the work priorities.
 MeerCommunity Startup Center (EXIST funded): Establishing and implementing a central contact point for startups and providing sensitization and integration into courses.
 Attracting and promoting female top talent scientists: Raising awareness and motivation for career paths in (transfer-oriented) research for young female scientists and students.
 AnkerPROF (FH-Personal funded): Developing a structured pathway for the qualification of young scientists.
SWOT-Analysis
In addition to its focus on teaching, transfer-oriented research with a clear profile has developed as a strength of the UASEL in recent years. The ASTRA project emphasizes this aspect, and therefore the SWOT analysis focuses on this aspect of the UASEL. The research profile is derived from the three main research areas listed in the research map of the Germans Rectors’ Conference (Sustainable Technologies, Industrial Informatics, Resource Orientation in the Tension of the Individual and Society). The volume of third-party funding has increased from about €2 million in 2019 to over €4.5 million in 2023. The UASEL has been particularly successful in securing Horizon2020 funds. Notably, a significant portion of the funding (10%) is commissioned research from regional companies. This demonstrates the trust regional businesses have in the university's capabilities and signals the high potential for positive regional development.
The transfer projects, initiatives and networks outlined above (see profile) have developed into a strength of the UASEL because they are not considered in isolation, but have established a coordinated and concerted collaboration. 
Due to its peripheral location, the Ems-Dollart region has traditionally been structurally weak, a situation that only began to improve slowly. Until the 2000s, the region repeatedly faced recessions and crises, particularly in shipbuilding and the automotive industry. After relative improvements in the last 20 years, the region now faces new, significant challenges and partially radical changes. These changes are occurring primarily in the regional key industries - the economic sectors that have driven the growth on which the region primarily depends today. These industries must now more than ever navigate the transition, especially in light of digital, energy, and environmental policy challenges and conditions.
As depicted in the Potential Analysis (WKN), the UASEL sees itself as having a special responsibility to actively shape the region's structural change through applied research and contribute to the sustainable regional transformation of the Ems-Dollart region. The UASEL sees in the lead role in the sustainable transformation of the region an opportunity to position the UASEL in the national and international science system, as societally relevant, impact-oriented transdisciplinary research will gain importance. Due to the university's opening up to regional transfer combined with the initiation of the necessary support structures, the UASEL has a broad network of practical partners and is part of numerous initiatives and networks. Thus, there is regular exchange with companies, chambers, economic development agencies, with relevant actors in the social sector, as well as NGOs. The UASEL is a central part of the development strategies of the districts and a central actor in practice networks such as the Ems Achse. This integration into networks and structures presents an opportunity for the UASEL to successfully disseminate innovations and research results. The university's strategic partnerships with regional actors are also exemplary:
 Wachstumsregion Ems-Achse
 Zweckverband Ems-Dollart Region
 Digital Hub Ostfriesland
 Maritime Competence Center
 Cooperation with the Chamber of Commerce and the Chamber of Crafts
 Cooperation with the Municipalities (e.g., economic development agencies or specialist services for health and social affairs)
 Strategic partnerships with companies, social institutions, and institutions for basic care and participation.
These networks and collaborations are increasingly taking shape in the neighboring Netherlands. An example is the consortium of the universities from the north-east Netherlands to form the University of the North. 
So far, cooperation is based on joined projects. Networks established within the projects dissolve again after the end of the project, and a long-term cooperation rarely succeeds. An institutionalized, structured, and strategically anchored cooperation is only in the initial stages and is limited to a few number of distinct topics (e.g., Green shipping, sustainable mobility). The whole institution approach has not yet been started. Another consequence is the fragmented external appearance, which is essentially shaped by the successes of individual research projects or researchers and does not lead to a consistent image of the university as a place where applied solutions are being developed for sustainable transformation. The necessity of achieving precisely formulated and focused goals in research projects also leads to the individual working groups maintaining only a small degree of cooperation among each other. The solution to transdisciplinary questions of a sustainable transformation requires the realization of synergy potentials, which result from the joint use of research infrastructure and the interdisciplinary cooperation of researchers with different perspectives. These potentials have so far been exploited only to a limited extent. Project-related transfer projects are also usually less visible (e.g., due to confidentiality agreements). As a result, the strategic importance of the transfer to the UASEL gains little recognition outside of the university.
Transfer projects, unlike "classic" research projects, are usually only limited in their use for reputation building. Furthermore, the research question and methodology in transfer projects must be closely coordinated with the transfer partners and lead to partially inherent goal conflicts (e.g., economic exploitation vs knowledge gain). This makes transfer projects less attractive to researchers. Therefore, incentive and appreciation structures specifically aimed at transfer topics must be created. In addition, due to its geographical location on the edge, the UASEL is located in a challenging catchment area in a structurally weak environment.
Table 1 SWOT-Analysis
Strengths	Weaknesses
 Research priorities aligned with regional growth fields
 High success rate with EU Horizon
 Numerous transfer activities started in recent years	 Cooperation mainly on project basis 
 Fragmented external appearance
 Limited interdisciplinary cooperation
Chances	Threats
 Regional transformation pressure 
 University well connected in the region
 More collaboration with NL	 Geographical peripheral location
 Structurally weak environment
 Limited incentives for transfer projects 

3. Strategic Goals (ca. 5 pages)
The central aim of the ASTRA project is to redesign transfer-oriented research towards interdisciplinary cooperation between scientists in order to develop solutions for the sustainable transformation of rural areas. An interactive living lab is to be created at the UASEL. Transformation paths for relevant stakeholders are to be identified there, both in physical space and in the virtual sphere (VR/AR, Metaverse). By bringing together the various transfer structures and initiatives under a common umbrella, a uniform overall image of the UASEL should become clearly recognizable.  Due to its diverse professional profile, the UASEL and its professors have the necessary expertise to master the complexity associated with the sustainability transformation and to develop practical solutions. The focus here is on development of the professors already employed at the UASEL and on avoiding extensive new appointments. The age structure, the high proportion of newly appointed professors and the existing skills profile make this approach possible. The UASEL sees great potential in interdisciplinary collaboration, which is reflected in joint project management and the joint supervision of junior researchers.
The framework to be created in the ASTRA project will develop, establish and evaluate structures at the UASEL that create strong incentives for interdisciplinary collaboration beyond the project. This ASTRA framework with a clear reference to application-oriented sustainability transformation will give the university a unique profile in research in Niedersachsen and, in the long term, will also provide impetus for the further development of the study courses and increase the attractiveness of the UASEL for all stakeholders. 
Based on the strategic sustainability goals of the UN (SDG) and the German sustainability strategy, regional needs have been compared with the university's competences, which are reflected in the main research areas. This resulted in three topic-centered fields of action (working packages) in which interdisciplinary projects are to be carried out. In addition, two fields of action have been developed which, on the one hand, enable innovative methods of knowledge transfer in both physical and virtual space and, on the other hand, establish digital support structures at the UASEL in order to be able to continue to operate and expand the ASTRA framework at the university even after the project funding has ended. The individual implementation projects are defined in the fields of action to which the initial projects can be assigned (see Figure 2).


Figure 2  ASTRA framework
Young scientists and new appointments of professors fit ideally into the ASTRA structure and lead to lasting innovation and relevance of the project topics dealt with there. With the proposed project, initial projects are to be carried out in the fields of action in order to adapt the concept if necessary and to collect best-practice examples. Furthermore, innovative methods of knowledge transfer and comprehensive support for the ASTRA framework will be developed in the transfer and support areas, which will then go into regular operation. The project is also viable with a smaller number of initial projects, but its impact would be significantly reduced.
The UASEL has already pursued a similar approach with the Green Shipping Niedersachsen (funded by the Niedersachsen Ministry of Science and Culture, MWK) and the Transfer Centre for Sustainable Mobility (funded by the “Innovation an Fachhochschulen” program). In the project proposed here, these experiences will be taken up and transferred to the entire UASEL.
The three topic-centered fields of action coincide with the research priorities and regional needs and are linked to the existing transfer initiatives. In addition to the transfer dissemination pathway, the doctoral center currently being developed at the UASEL, the cooperation with the University of Vechta in the field of social sciences and nautics and the network of universities of applied sciences in Niedersachen will also focus on the scientific qualification of young academics (doctoral students). Application-orientated, topic-centered, interdisciplinary research also opens up prospects for young scientists with regard to an academic career. ASTRA, in conjunction with AnkerPROF, places this career path prominently in the spotlight.
Interdisciplinary cooperation cannot simply be ordered but requires appropriate structures and incentive systems, which are to be permanently established at the UASEL with the ASTRA framework. ASTRA also creates the organizational conditions for transdisciplinary cooperation for sustainable regional transformation. The starting point is the professors with their inherently interdisciplinary profile ("T-shaped researchers"). They assign themselves to the fields of action named in the ASTRA framework and generate transformation projects within them. On the one hand, there is coordination within the fields of action as well as the transformation projects. These fields of action are coordinated by the university's extended Executive Board, so that synergies between become visible and the UASEL is perceived as an institution acting in a concerted manner.
The strategic level of the ASTRA project thus essentially comprises the following key goals:
 Promotion of interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary cooperation
 Sharpening the profile of application-oriented research: The UASEL develops application-oriented solutions for sustainable regional transformation
 Increasing the attractiveness of the UASEL for all stakeholders (scientists, employees, students, prospective students)
 Increasing the visibility of the UASEL and the region as a place of innovation
 Tapping into the potential of professors' expertise and academic careers for young academics
On the other hand, the framework offers a uniform framework for action, but also contains sufficient flexibility to be able to react to personnel or thematic changes without having to change the overall structure. This clearly defined profile opens up numerous opportunities for cooperation, both within Lower Saxony and beyond. Examples include:
 Universities in the north-west of Niedersachsen, with which there is already intensive cooperation through joint degree programs or projects (University of Oldenburg, University of Vechta, Jade University of Applied Sciences)
 University of the North as an association of universities in north-east Netherland universities (e.g., Rijksuniversiteit Groningen, Hanze Hogeschool, Stenden University of Applied Scienced)
 University of Lüneburg through the existing sustainability research structures there
 Network for the circular economy in south-eastern Lower Saxony (Ostfalia University of Applied Sciences, TU Clausthal, TU Braunschweig)
 Network of universities of applied sciences in Niedersachsen to establish a joint graduate program at universities of applied sciences in Niedersachsen
 Stifterverband (Policy Paper "The Sustainable University")
With the ASTRA project, the UASEL is able to develop a clear profile for applied research in Niedersachsen, Germany and Europe. This not only makes the university's expertise in transformation in the region visible, but the solutions can also be used in other rural regions affected by structural change. In conjunction with the opportunities for cooperation, this also increases the university's chances of significantly increasing the already greatly increased project volume, particularly in federal and EU programs, and also generating further commissioned projects.
4. Implementation (ca. 15 pages)
Besides the project management and governance work package (WP 0) the project can be divided into three topic-centered work packages and two support-oriented work packages (one for each field of action). For each work package initial projects have been identified.
## Gesamtrahmen aufgreifen


Figure 3  Structure of the ASTRA project

## List mit Beteiligten


WP 0 – Project Management and Governance
The project is directly assigned to the extended executive board of the university (Board plus deans of the faculties), which thus assumes a coordinating role and has overall responsibility for the success of the project. 
Project controlling, report management, evaluation of measures and target achievement monitoring also fall within the responsibility of the project management. It is also responsible for communication within the UASEL and the external presentation of the project (together with the extended executive board). It also serves as the (first) point of contact for members of the UASEL who are not actively involved in the project and thus ensures internal dissemination throughout the project. The project management reports directly to the extended board. At the same time, the advisory board is appointed by the Senate. It is made up of relevant external stakeholders from practice and academia, who are to make recommendations on the further development of the project and framework.
The majority of the requested funds will be used for scientific personnel, usually for young researchers. This leads to a significant strengthening of transfer-oriented young scientists who are trained in the ASTRA project. 
In order to intensify interdisciplinary cooperation, a monthly meeting will be held for each work package, in which all junior scientists and professors will participate. This meeting, organized as a scientific seminar, can also include external guests if required. Once a quarter, all junior researchers and their supervisors of ASTRA will come together as part of an ASTRA seminar. Public ASTRA events are also planned to accompany the project, at which stakeholders in the region can find out about the current status of the work. 

WP 1 - Sustainable transformation of corporates
##Rahmen für WP1
WP 1.1 – Sustainable Accounting (Prof. Dr. Knut Henkel)
Starting in 2024, the new Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive and the European Sustainability Reporting Standards must be applied by European companies. In Germany, approximately 14,000 companies are directly affected by this. The goal is to conduct application-oriented research on this new and complex topic, particularly for small and medium-sized enterprises. Checklists for products, implementation aids, and Sustainable Performance Accounting indicators will be provided. Furthermore, in this work package, the approaches developed in the other work packages for sustainability transformation will be evaluated with regard to their impact on sustainability reporting.
WP 1.2 – Sustainability Governance (Prof. Dr. Annika Wolf)
Sustainable governance will lead to a more coherent organizational framework for SMEs by developing sustainability strategies, transparency & accountability, risk management & compliance, stakeholder engagement and corporate social responsibility by the respective change management meaures. The goal is to advise regional companies with a systemic and integral approach about their sustainability maturity level and support their evolution pathway. Methodologically, a current status quo survey will be conducted, followed by analysis and prioritization of sustainable governance aspects. This will be the basis for implementation, which will be evaluated by controlling in an iterative process. This WP will assist the companies cooperating throughout the diverse WP to set up a sustainability governance structure, which is a prerequisite for transformation towards sustainability.
WP 1.3 - Sustainable energy supply in rural areas (Prof. Dr. Marc Hanfeld, Prof. Dr. Dirk Schleuter, Prof. Dr. Joachim Schwarz, Dr. Stephan Kotzur)
A multitude of solutions and products that companies can use to optimize their energy supply with renewables are available meanwhile. In WP 1.3, the impact of changes in production and demand on energy supply optimization and CO2 emissions for companies and institutions in rural areas will be investigated, and under what conditions such changes are economically viable. The aforementioned questions will be answered quantitatively using statistical models, as well as energy simulation and optimization models. The result will be a dynamic decision support tool, tested on real data from, among others, the UASEL, which will also be available for external users and their specific decision-making situations. The tool will focus on the requirements of sustainability reporting by including information necessary for such reporting.
WP 1.4 - Digital Manufacturing and Logistics Intelligence for More Efficiency and Sustainability in Factory Operation (Prof. Dr. Sven Carsten Lange, Prof. Dr. Dirk Schleuter, Prof. Dr. Christoph Wunck, Dr. Stephan Kotzur)
The efficient use of resources is a key success factor for innovation leadership and enable sustainable transformation. Digitization and the use of AI technologies in designing future Human-Machine Interfaces (HMI) play a central role. Technologies and methods will be developed to meet the essential technological needs for enabling user-centered HMI, Manufacturing Intelligence (MI), and Machine Learning (ML) for efficient and sustainable production and logistics. The first action item will be “Voice-Controlled, Multifunctional HMI”. It focuses on audio-based condition monitoring of production and logistics processes in real-time, the use of digital audio HMI for voice control of systems, multimodal sensor integration, feature extraction and modeling, as well as business and operating models for maintenance and service. The second action item is “Manufacturing Intelligence”, that works on data and data infrastructure to enable companies to respond more agilely and accurately to rapidly changing market conditions (short-term unavailability of upstream products, personnel shortages, smaller quantities, higher variety, shorter planning periods, etc.). The demonstrator part “AutoSLT” integrates the developed technological features into a multimodal user scenario of an integrated, production-related logistics process using audio-technological HMI, data mining, and data-driven servitization – representative of the workplace system of the Industry 5.0 roadmaps, enabling user-centered and simultaneous control, monitoring, documentation, and communication. The community platform project "Digital Manufacturing and Logistics Intelligence for More Efficiency and Sustainability in Factory Operation" serves as a transfer tool for industrialization solutions and will be established as a project incubator and regional/national service provider for training and development as well as an innovation driver for future digitization projects of the UASEL. The "DIMA-Platform" project connects various departments of the UASEL as well as existing company networks in the region and cooperates especially with the WP 1.1 and 5.2.

Figure 4 Overall concept of WP 1.4

WP 1.5 - Digitalization and AI in social services and organizations (Prof. Dr. Anna-Lena Schönauer, Prof. Dr. Michael Herschelmann, Prof. Dr. Eva-Maria Schön)
Digital transformation has become one of the key issues for organizations in the 21st century. However, this applies not only to the traditional large industry-related and knowledge-based organizations, but also increasingly to institutions and organizations in the social sector. The latest developments in the field of artificial intelligence are also opening up the possibility of digitizing previously personal services in the social sector beyond the digitization of administrative processes. At the same time, implementation is rather slow. Digitalization is also playing an increasingly important role in child protection, and digital technologies could be used more in rural areas in particular because the availability of face-to-face counselling is difficult in rural areas. The objective of this WP is to support regional institutions and organizations in the field of child protection (for example youth welfare offices, child protection centres, advice centres) by means of introducing digital and Artificial Intelligence (AI) tools. This allows us to support the digital transformation in the social sector of Niedersachsen especially in in rural areas. In a first, step, we analyze the status quo in order to receive a better understanding of the problems in the field and to understand the conditions in the field (organizational structures, competencies, resources) from multiple perspectives. In the pilot phase, suitable and cost-effective applications are to be selected for individual institutions and the process of introducing and implementing the technology is to be accompanied. The aim is to support and train two to three institutions in the introduction of digital applications. In the third step, guidelines and AI tools are delivered on a larger scale. In addition, multipliers for regional roll-out need to be trained in cooperation with the knowledge transfer center of the UASEL. The scientific monitoring of the measures and the resulting findings will form the foundation for a roll-out of the project. In addition to new research findings, reflected experience and tried-and-tested tools for practice, the potential success of the measures could be seen as encouraging child protection professionals to overcome barriers to entry and take their own first steps. This lever can contribute to better care for children affected by violence in rural areas. In the future, the recommendations and potentials developed will also be made available and adapted for services and organizations in other fields of social work.

WP 2 - Circular economy in regional context
##Rahmen für WP2
WP 2.1 - Incubator for Maritime Circularity 2050 (Prof. Dr. Marcus Bentin, Prof. Dr. Ivan Herráez, Prof. Dr. Kathrin Ottink, Prof. Dr. Dirk Schleuter, Prof. Dr. Armando Walter Colombo, Dr. Stephan Kotzur, Dr. Thomas Ebel) 
The maritime sector plays a special role in regional development and is a key industry for sustainable regional transformation. The Incubator for Maritime Circularity 2050 promotes circularity principles in the maritime economy. It aims to strategically develop the industrial and scientific maritime sector in Niedersachsen and implement sustainable solutions in a competence center for maritime circularity. By fostering collaboration between research and industry, the initiative will establish resource-efficient technologies and reduce the ecological footprint of this important industry sector. Through new innovative digital approaches, recycling processes and markets, the incubator sets new standards. The incubator’s measures contribute to achieving SDGs by optimizing supply chains, reducing ecological footprints, creating jobs and strengthening the regional economy and resilience. Main actions to be taken will be an analysis of political  and societal environment. Further it will create awareness for empowering circularity in the maritime industry. It will develop, implement and evaluate “Circularity Checks” for companies which will also be aligned with WP 1. In collaboration with WP 1.1 and 1.3 it will emphasize the role of offshore wind energy and will focus on the lifecycle of offshore wind turbines from a cradle-to-cradle perspective (LCA). The results will be pooled within an International Collaborative Digital Circularity Platform focusing on the research and innovation of an AI-based and Industry 4.0-compliant infrastructure to implement the Digital Thread associated with the lifecycle in industrial production, supporting the implementation of the corresponding Digital Product Passport (DPP). In this context a joint effort together with WP 1.4 is planned. 

Figure 5 Concept of maritime circularity
WP 2.2 – Carbon Neutral Wastewater Treatment Plants (Prof. Dr. Ivan Herráez, Prof. Dr. Claudia Gallert , Prof. Dr. Armando Walter Colombo)
In rural areas, the climate-neutral operation of wastewater treatment plants (WWTP) presents significant challenges for many municipalities. Unlike urban areas, the rural structure offers limited opportunities to integrate wastewater treatment plants into existing material and energy flow networks. In this WP, the challenges of implementing a carbon-neutral WWTP will be addressed by providing a solution based on a multidisciplinary approach combining integrated contributions from the fields of microbiology, energy efficiency and renewable energy, as well as digitalization and data sciences applied to smart process-automation. Combining renewable energies, heat pumps, microbiological methods, as well as Industry 4.0-compliant and AI/ML-based methods and tools for digitalizing processes and systems can achieve climate neutrality for wastewater treatment plants. Interdisciplinary cooperation brings together expertise from very different scientific fields, like microbiology, mechanical engineering and informatics, enhancing the potential for the development of innovative sustainable technologies for water/wastewater treatment and energy generation. The planned work  includes testing and optimization of the scientific and technological developments in a real WWTP combining renewable energies, energy efficiency, industrial informatics and modern wastewater biological processes. A first expected impact of the envisioned solution is the promotion of synergies between research and industrial applications, ensuring that scientific advancements benefit the regional economy. 
WP 3 - Living Healthy Together (Prof. Dr. Maren Grautmann, Prof. Dr. Gavin Kane, Prof. Dr. Claudia Gallert, Prof. Dr. Knut Tielking, Prof. Dr. Annika Wolf, Prof. Dr. Stephan Berg, Prof. Dr. Phillip Huke, Prof. Dr. Sören Schmidt, Prof. Dr. Jutta Lindert, Prof. Dr. Anna-Lena Schönauer)
##Rahmen für WP3
The realization for „Living Healthy Together” is established on four concerted fields of research and application from all departments of the UASEL.  Although diverse in specifics, all fields follow a common framework in their approach and support the common objective: analysis, improvement, and sustainable transformation of relevant influencing factors for a healthy coexistence of the population of the region. "Living Healthy Together" follows an interdisciplinary, mixed-methods approach to address the complexity of health in a targeted region. A "co-design approach" is used, which follows a common research logic. This logic, which is properly addressed in different research and application fields (see Figure 6).
I would not write defining - I would write assessing health and mental health

Figure 6 Methodology of WP 3
To achieve our goals we subdivide the interdisciplinary scientific approach into four substeps:
1. Defining and understanding Healthy Living Together, i.e. assessing perspectives on the health from people living in and working in the targeted region,
2. Structuring and analysing information, i.e. identifying individual, organizational and place related factors that influence health,
3. Shaping and implementation, i.e. co-creating, multidimensional interventions to strengthen capacities for health of those living in remote areas in close cooperation with WP 4.
4. Knowledge dissemination, i.e. providing a toolbox for studying, understanding and improving health in remote areas in close cooperation with WP 4.
5. We will assess and analyze resilience trajectories (at the individual, organizational, and community levels) once each year. The resilience trajectories will be analyzed separately and in multilevel models.
The contextualized approach also implies the constitutive networking with other research and scientific institutions (e.g., medical faculties), society and societal groups (population, NGOs), local councils, government agencies, political movements; this is evident from the multitude of cooperation partners in the four research and application fields. The research and understanding allows for a sustainable transformation into a healthy cohabitation in the targeted region. The interlinking of the research fields (see Figure 7) occurs on a personnel, organisational, and subject-specific level through regular consultations, data exchange, and coordination of measures for dissemination. 

HEALTH	I do not know this word	Mental Health, resilience  and wellbeing
studying and transforming physical and mental health	investigating and transforming social relationsships	lcohort study study on mental health and wellbeing in the region
Examples: Addiction Map of East Frisia, Psychological Health of Children and young Adolescents	Examples: Robots Supporting Healthcare Personnel, Digital Health Skills with regional Professionals,  Resilience, Culture and Health	Examples: Strengthening Mental health literacy and individual and community health structural and individual capacities in rural areas 
REGION
investigating places and relationships of places with health
Examples: Spread of pathogenic bacteria as a result of climate change, Light pollution
Figure 7 Research and Application Fields

WP 4 - ASTRA Living Labs
##Rahmen für WP4
WP 4.1 – ASTRA Village in the Physical Sphere (Katrin Stern, Prof. Dr. Kathrin Ottink)
This WP will established a place called “ASTRA Village” where project results will be presented to all relevant stakeholders.  The ASTRA Village, consisting of four tiny houses, a town center (an event tent) and a town hall (FabLab at our university) which shall evolve to a forum, where also the social challenges that come along with it, can be discussed. The ASTRA Village will serve as a physical representation and interactive innovation living lab for all WPs. The houses serve as laboratories and testing environments where innovative, sustainable technologies, and concepts will be presented to the public. The houses will function as agile exhibition locations where the developed, sustainable solutions and research results can be presented to the public, political decision-makers, and industrial partners. Here, visitors can gain insights into the functioning and advantages of sustainable technologies and construction methods through guided tours and interactive exhibitions. In this aspect, the village establishes itself as an excursion destination for young talents from the region. It will shape the successful implementation of research communication in all fields. All aspects of sustainable transformation can be made illustrative at the Campus in Emden where a location has been selected already for the ASTRA village.

Figure 8 Comparison of ASTRA Village: planned vision and expected reality

WP 4.2 – ASTRA Village in the Educational Metaverse (Prof. Dr. Maria Rauschenberger, Prof. Dr. Thies Pfeiffer, Prof. Dr. Eva-Maria Schön, Prof. Dr. Patrick Felke, Prof. Dr. Jörg Thomaschewski)
The concept of the physical ASTRA Village and its thematic tiny houses is picked up and extended to the Educational Metaverse: physical exhibitions are paralleled using Immersive Technologies (Virtual Reality, Augmented Reality) to experience a gamified environment. The developed platform will allow multiple participants to experience the educational content, by interacting both with the exhibits as well as with other participants and an embodied conversational agent which acts as tour guide and learning facilitator. The focus of this work package is on the digitalization of the physical exhibitions for the metaverse, as well as its operation and the human experience through gamified elements. The technological basis for a safe and efficient operation as well as for a motivational and easy to author framework is laid in the research conducted in work package 5.1. The ASTRA Village in the Educational Metaverse acts as a Living Lab for work package 5.1, in which new approaches can be evaluated under real life conditions both within the numerous transfer events conducted in the ASTRA Village and in the online courses of study programs as content modules. The WP will address immersive visualization systems as well as remote experimentation and participation systems. In cooperation with WP 4.1, WP 5.1, and the WPs 1-3 interactive immersive exhibitions will be implemented as digital twins of the physical installations designed for the ASTRA Village. Based on those experiences, in particular with the embodied conversational agent ASTRA, the didactic concepts of the interactive host will be re-transferred into the physical exhibitions using Augmented Reality Technology. This will allow visitors to experience guided tours through the exhibitions in a self-paced, individualized manner (e.g., setting the degree of Gamification), adapting to their level of knowledge, age, or personal interests.

WP 4.3 - GreenShipping Niedersachsen - Project incubator “Sustainable Maritime Mobility” (Prof. Dr. Marcus Bentin, Prof. Dr.Jann Strybny, Prof. Kapt. Michael Vahs)
Since 2015, “GreenShipping Niedersachsen” (GSN) successfully promotes applied maritime research and technology transfer. It combines the two maritime departments of the UASEL and the Jade University of Applied Sciences with the network and project management companies MARIKO (Leer) and MCN (Elsfleth), supported by the Fraunhofer IWES and the DLR Institute System Engineering for Future Mobility. The project incubator “Sustainable Maritime Mobility” promotes transdisciplinarity through the network partners MARIKO and MCN, which facilitate contact with various players in the maritime collaborative economy and help identify research topics that are of interest for the maritime economy and civil society. The close cooperation between the named GSN partners enables an extremely efficient working mode. Identified thematic key areas are: 
 sustainable maritime propulsion systems 
 sustainable ship-design 
 sustainable offshore services.
This WP creates impact in the technological and societal transition towards a sustainable maritime mobility on a regional as well as global scale. The maritime industry in Niedersachsen, politics and civil society profit through concrete impulses for future-oriented and sustainable action.

WP 4.4 - Economic Sustainability through Corporate Entre- and Sciencepreneurship (Prof. Dr. Tom Koch, Dr. Kai Bruns, Prof. Dr. Marc Hanfeld)
By placing economic sustainability at the core of business and academic progress, WP 4.4 is fostering a thriving ecosystem of sustainable entrepreneurship in the region. It elevates the UASEL as a main regional driver in green innovation and sciencepreneurship. All activities will include rigorous mixed-method evaluations, incorporating focus groups and questionnaires, to provide empirical evidence on outputs, outcomes and impact, and thus contribute substantially to entrepreneurship research. Upskilling and innovation workshops will be conducted as well as supporting outcome of other WP to develop market-ready innovations (sciencepreneurship). 
WP 5 - Digital Service Technologies
##Rahmen für WP5
WP 5.1 - Educational Metaverse Technologies (Prof. Dr. Maria Rauschenberger, Prof. Dr. Thies Pfeiffer, Prof. Dr. Patrick Felke, Prof. Dr. Eva-Maria Schön, Prof. Dr. Jörg Thomaschewski)
Under the umbrella of Educational Metaverse Technologies (EMT) we aggregate core technologies for media processing (generative AI), natural interaction (large language models, embodied conversational agents), spatial computing, and interactive visualization (mixed reality technologies). These technical pillars are flanked by methods, such as didactics, gamification, user experience design, and agile development methods, to create foundations for the authoring, use, and implementation of learning facilities in the educational metaverse. Based on the experiences of previous research projects this WP will research, develop, and evaluate concepts for the educational metaverse on the example of the Living Lab implemented together with work package 4.2. A strong technical goal will be securing the metaverse platform on the networking level, to ensure privacy and public confidence, e.g. by employing post-quantum secure cryptography, both important factors regarding the acceptance of educational metaverse technologies in the general public as well as in organizations of the public sector and industry. In this WP, a platform for the ASTRA Village in the educational metaverse will be designed and evaluated in an iterative manner in cooperation with the Living Lab established in WP 4.2. It will be investigated how generative AI can be used to support the authors in the process of content creation for immersive learning. The results of this work will improve the efficiency with which content can be created and will empower more potential authors to create content on their own. Embodied conversational agents for the educational metaverse will improve the learning experience of learners by motivational and guided didactic dialogues. The concept will also be transferred to the physical world. Besides technical aspects, the transfer poses the challenge of migrating from a closed virtual world, in which all content is digital and thus both system and author have full knowledge of the (expected) environment, towards a more open world. The developments will enhance the “Security by Design” approach. Thereby a completely new threat-model will be developed and according countermeasures defined to guarantee the goal of security by design. It will be verified by extensive pentests based on  proper test settings.
WP 5.2 - ReST Data Platform: Driving Regional Innovation Through Advanced Digital Technology (Prof. Dr. Marc Hanfeld, Dr. Stephan Kotzur, Prof. Dr. Dirk Schleuter, Prof. Dr. Thorsten Schmidt)
The platform plays a pivotal role in this endeavor, serving as a link between the WPs and providing a robust data infrastructure. It functions as a central data hub and a platform for data collection, analysis, and visualization, supporting both the WPs and regional stakeholders. By leveraging advanced technologies such as Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) and Large Language Models (LLMs), the platform enhances data interaction and delivers precise, contextualized insights.  By offering relevant data and enhancing analytical capabilities, the ReST Data Platform becomes an essential tool for data-driven decision-making and the implementation of sustainable development strategies. 
In WP 1, the platform supports business transformation by providing tools for comprehensive data analysis and insights generation. These capabilities enable stakeholders to make informed decisions, improve operational efficiency, and adopt sustainable practices. In WP 2, the platform aids circular economy initiatives by integrating and analyzing diverse data sources to develop sustainable systems. It provides insights into environmental impacts and sustainability metrics, facilitating the design of efficient and eco-friendly industrial processes. In WP 3, the ReST Data Platform supports public health and well-being by monitoring and evaluating health interventions and strategies. It offers tools for epidemiological analysis and data visualization, enabling stakeholders to track trends and assess the impacts of interventions.
Overall, the ReST Data Platform's capabilities in data integration, advanced analytics, and visualization provide critical support for each WP, enabling data-driven decision-making and fostering sustainable development across the region.

WP 5.3 - Efficient administration processes by automation (Johannes Beck)
The anticipated increase in transfer activities requires efficient project management. This can only be achieved through enhanced digitalization of administrative processes. As a first step, administrative processes are getting analyzed in a coordinated, cross-divisional and systematic manner with regard to necessary adjustments for a switch to fully digital workflows. In a second step, new workflows (target processes) will be developed, implemented and established with the relevant stakeholders. Following steps are required:
 Clustering of already digitalized processes in terms of their level of maturity and identification of potential for data integration in the various digital processes. 
 Standardization of data sources and consideration of new data clusters as well as identification and interpretation of patterns and trends.
 Evaluation of the potential of Robotic Process Automation (RPA) and Intelligent Process Automation (IPA) for processes (in particular) with dedicated interface problems. This includes identification of suitable applications and specific solutions.
 Step-by-step automation of identified impact processes. 
 Establishment of exchange formats with research and teaching 
 Development of formats for knowledge documentation and communication as well as development of best practices for networking
Extending the digitalization strategy already in place by adding the aspect of automation has the potential to achieve considerable efficiency gains in administrative processes and have a lasting positive impact on the general data quality in the UASEL landscape. It is to be expected that significant improvements can be achieved in the speed of response of the university administration as well as the level of service offered to students, researchers and teaching staff.
5. Expected Impact and Key Indicators (ca. 5 pages)
The impact results from the interdisciplinary collaboration of scientists in the individual initial projects and also from the exchange within the overall project. Therefore, there is an comprehensive impact of the overall project, which is complemented by the specific impact of the work packages focused on particular themes.
The output of the overall project consists of the qualification of young scientists through the total number of positions applied for. This is linked to the scientific output that arises from the project work and publications. By connecting to the planned graduate school, doctoral theses will be completed at the UASEL . Furthermore, output will be generated through the key transfer fields of the Transferbarometer (collaborations with partners, innovation networks, entrepreneurship, transfer-oriented teaching, scientific dialogue). In this context, the development of practical concepts, (online) seminars, innovative event formats (festivals, hackathons, etc.) in the ASTRA villages (both physical and virtual) are particularly noteworthy.
A significant output of the overall project is the strengthening of interdisciplinary collaboration within the university. Scientists will also be motivated for transfer projects, and the institutional prerequisites for transfer can be improved in the ongoing transformation process of the UASEL. Through the concerted approach, the university will be perceived in the region, as well as nationally and in Europe, as an incubator for sustainable societal transformation. This increases (international) visibility and strengthens the university's profile in applied research. Consequently, the chances of acquiring further ASTRA projects increase significantly, whether through federal and European funding programs or commissioned projects.
The overall project significantly supports the region in its sustainable transformation and structural change. The university and the region can thus jointly provide an important example of how rural regions undergoing structural change can be supported through innovations. Furthermore, important contributions to applied sustainability research are expected, demonstrating how a sustainable transformation can succeed through concrete best-practice examples.
WP 1 -  Sustainable transformation of corporates
Outputs will include specific offers for companies regarding sustainability reporting and the development of sustainability strategies. This encompasses transparency and accountability in line with international standards, as well as risk management and compliance. Companies will be provided with decision-support tools, such as methods to optimize the supply of renewable energies and integrate these into their sustainability strategies. In addition to the manufacturing sector, companies from the social sector will play a crucial role. For instance, child protection organizations will be shown ways in which digital tools and AI can enable participation for children and their carers especially in rural areas in the region.
As a significant output, companies, particularly in the manufacturing sector and social organizations, will be equipped with instruments for enhanced organizational development. This will involve digital tools as well as improved resource and energy efficiency.
This work package will increase UASEL‘s regional relevance as innovation partner by establishing a national and international connected service repository for data-driven tools and services what will positively impact companies' ability to strategically adapt to transformation, even in difficult market conditions. Sustainability reporting offers companies a steering opportunity. Additionally, companies' environmental impacts will be minimized through the use of renewable energies, and the digital transformation will be elevated to a new level, particularly in companies that are pivotal to the region, such as those in the manufacturing sector and social organizations.
 WP 2 - Circular economy in regional context
In addition to the comprehensive results, specific outcomes are expected concerning the regional circular economy. The outcomes include Life Cycle Assessments for regional products and circular economy checks with regional companies at the Circo-Hub. The International Collaborative Digital Circularity Platform is a significant output with international visibility.
The university will gain expertise in the circular economy, which is in demand by regional practice partners, and will expand its collaborations in this area. The university will engage in national and international networks and cooperate with circular economy initiatives in Niedersachsen, Germany and Europe.
This work package will establish a competence center for Maritime Circularity, raising awareness of that topic and making a significant contribution to the transformation by developing new business models and building an AI-based, Industry 4.0-compatible infrastructure supporting the whole engineering process conducting to establish the corresponding Digital Product Passport (DPP).
 
WP 3 – Living health together
Resilience trajectories (at the individual, organizational, and community levels) will be assessed and analyzed once each year. The resilience trajectories will be analyzed separately and in multilevel models.
 
WP 4 - ASTRA Living labs
The ASTRA-Village will create capacities for regional transfer on various levels. It will be the embracing accompaniment to the entire project regarding (science) communication and knowledge transfer. The following positions in conjunction with AP 1-3 will shape the successful implementation during its runtime and thereafter. The ASTRA Village will be the brand and beacon for the activities, such as: communication over social media platforms, like LinkedIn and Instagram, to disseminate the work inside the projects and enable direct interaction with the public. In addition, Video projects, radio contributions and podcasts complement the portfolio. Based on our long-standing experience in science communication and transfer, the ASTRA-Village will increase the visibility of the project, the university and the region, and boost interest in local activities regarding sustainability.
The houses serve as a showcase and platform where innovative, sustainable technologies, and concepts will be presented to the public. (see APs 1-3). Where for an outsider the University as a whole may seem complex and unfamiliar the Village in contrast has a low-threshold which offers many topics accessible in one place. The same applies for the exchange beyond the departments within the university, as well as with partners from the business sector and abroad. The tiny houses are mobile and can be moved around the region to visit companies and the neighboring Netherlands to provide information about ongoing research projects. In addition, the tiny houses can be used as summer schools in the rural areas of East Frisia as a magnet to attract new students. The visibility of the university is increased by the tiny houses in numerous facets.
Overall, the aim of ASTRA Village is to initiate a discussion in the region through the presentation of the work packages, which stimulates a reflected sustainable development in the region. It is difficult to predict in which direction this will develop, and it largely depends on the actors and medium-term influences on the region. The crucial factor is not the result, but the availability of the corresponding information and technologies from the university in its role as a catalyst and contact point.
The ASTRA Village in the metaverse will have a strong impact on the future of education at UASEL, as several modern methods for digital learning technologies (remote experimentation, learning agents, immersive learning experiences, multi-user digital learning, security aspects of digital learning environments) are iteratively evaluated and improved. Beyond that, it will have a significant impact on regional industries, as the technologies and use cases demonstrated in the ASTRA village will provide useful blueprints for innovative training and service solutions.
The ASTRA “GreenShipping Niedersachsen” - Project incubator “Sustainable Maritime Mobility” creates impact in the technological and societal transition towards a sustainable maritime mobility on a regional as well as global scale. The maritime industry in Lower Niedersachsen, politics and civil society profit through concrete impulses for future-oriented and sustainable action. It will enable top-level research on Sustainable Maritime Mobility and hence increase international visibility by international projects. It will strengthen and empower UASEL as regional contact point for the maritime industry. Collaborations in Green Shipping with Jade University of Applied Sciences will be deepened and the network with University of Vechta (including the PostDoc program planned in the field of nautics (ProNaut)). 
By conducting innovation workshops an entrepreneurial mindset will be brought to researchers and local SMEs. SME identify opportunities for green business models which will lead to more SMEs engaged in the green economic transition. These efforts will not be limited to SMEs but also to the initial projects within ASTRA. Workshops will be organized for the scientists to develop an entrepreneurial mindset, skills and toolsets. Besides deepening their scientific knowledge and enhancing interdisciplinary skills, researchers will be empowered to act as entrepreneurs which will lead to more start-ups in the region.
 WP 5 – Digital Service Technologies
The ReST data platform will provide data to all WP which is a prerequisite for them to perform their analyses. The platform will integrate project data, generate valuable insights, and facilitate the publication of scientific and application-oriented articles. Key metrics include the amount of data available for platform use and the number of publications in esteemed journals. It will also act as an innovation incubator, with indicators such as the number of companies and local stakeholders utilizing its offerings. The platform will enhance the institution's methodological expertise and visibility both regionally and internationally. This will be achieved through research dissemination and participation in forums, leading to further collaborations and a strengthened academic reputation. Long-term impacts include influencing societal and scientific advancements, fostering a more informed public, and supporting sustainable regional development. The platform will establish itself as a repository for data-driven services, with regular use of its technologies both within and outside the university environment.
By automating administrative processes the UASEL will be in the position to manage projects (e.g., ASTRA itself) in a much more efficient way. reference model for the implementation of suitable RPA/IPA applications in administrative digitization will be elaborated and processes will be chosen as case studies. Employees will be trained and results will be provided to other universities in Niedersachsen. It will improve employee’s level of expertise in dealing with digitized workflows. Data transparency and process speed will be increased. This will lead to a substantial increase in service level for researchers and will have a long-term impact on digitalization strategies of UASEL and other universities.

## Übersicht: Regionaler Impact bzgl. SDG (—> Tabelle)
6. Implementation Schedule (max. 4 pages)
Please outline the implementation schedule graphically in one or more Gantt charts. In order to enable the reviewers to evaluate the adequacy of the costs, summarize the estimated costs for each measure in this chart. Here (PDF) you can find a simplified example.
## GANTT
## Kostenübersicht

 

■
 
22.10.2025
 
■
 
7

Termine/Berichte
Excel-Beleglisten


 
In turnusmäßigen Abständen erhalten Sie von der Drittmittelstelle eine Belegliste mit den bisher getätigten Ausgaben zur Prüfung. 
[Die Übersendung erfolgt ausschließlich an die Projektleitung. Sollte in den Verteiler auch ein*e Projektmitarbeiter*in aufgenommen werden, ist dieses gesondert der 
Drittmittelsachbearbeitung auf dem digitalen Wege mitzuteilen.]


 
Belegliste sind unbedingt zu prüfen; sofern Falschbuchungen vorhanden sind, sind diese entsprechend zu kommunizieren. 
Sabrina Sawicki
Verwendungsnachweis/-bericht
•
 
spätestens 2 Monate nach Projektabschluss
•
 
Im wissenschaftlichen Abschlussbericht wird um Darstellung des Verlaufs, der Ergebnisse und evtl. Änderungen des Projektes gebeten. (siehe Hinweisblatt in der Ablage der 
Bewilligungsbescheides)
•
 
Der zahlenmäßige Teil wird seitens der Finanzabteilung erstellt.


 
Erfolgt automatisiert über die Finanzabteilung.
Mittelabruf
Zwischenbericht
•
 
Jährlicher Kurzbericht (drei Seiten zum Projektfortschritt) – erstmalig am 01.10.2026 vorzulegen