Robot economy doubling times

There is a nascent literature on this topic.22 For a few-page treatment we basically agree with, see the “Industrial Explosion” section of Forethought’s report, or read our own take below.

During World War II the United States and many other countries converted their civilian economies to total war economies. This meant converting factories that produced cars into factories that produced planes and tanks, redirecting raw materials from consumer products to military products, and rerouting transportation networks accordingly.

We are imagining something similar, except faster because superintelligences are directing and managing the whole process.23 Roughly speaking, the plan is to convert existing factories to mass-produce a variety of robots (designed by superintelligences to be both better than existing robots and cheaper to produce), which then assist in the construction of newer, more efficient factories and laboratories, which produce larger quantities of more sophisticated robots, which produce even more advanced factories and laboratories, etc. until the combined robot economy spread across all the SEZs is as large as the human economy (and therefore needs to procure its own raw materials, energy, etc.) By that point, the new factories will have produced huge quantities of robotic mining equipment, solar panels, etc. in anticipation of needing to meet demand far greater than the legacy human economy can provide.24

How fast would this new robot economy grow? Some reference points:

    The modern human economy doubles every twenty years or so. Countries that have developed especially rapidly (e.g. China) sometimes manage to double their economies in less than a decade.

    A modern car factory produces roughly its own weight in cars in less than a year.25 Perhaps a fully robotic economy run by superintelligences would be able to reproduce itself in less than a year, so long as it didn’t start to run out of raw materials.26

    Yet that seems like it could be a dramatic underestimate. Plants and insects often have “doubling times” of far less than a year—sometimes just weeks! Perhaps eventually the robots would be so sophisticated, so intricately manufactured and well-designed, that the robot economy could double in a few weeks (again assuming available raw materials).

    Yet even that could be an underestimate. Plants and insects are operating under many constraints that superintelligent designers don’t have. For example, they need to take the form of self-contained organisms that self-replicate, instead of an economy of diverse and more specialized vehicles and factories shipping materials and equipment back and forth. Besides, bacteria and other tiny organisms reproduce in hours. It’s possible that, eventually, the autonomous robot economy would look more like e.g. a new kind of indigestible algae that spreads across the Earth’s oceans, doubling twice a day so that it covers the entire ocean surface in two months, along with an accompanying ecosystem of predator-species that convert algae into more useful products, themselves fed into floating factories that produce macro-structures like rockets and more floating factories.

Obviously, all of this is hard to predict. It’s like asking the inventors of the steam engine to guess how long it takes for a modern car factory to produce its own weight in cars, and also to guess how long it would take until such a factory first exists. But economic growth rates have accelerated by multiple orders of magnitude over the course of human history, and it seems plausible to us that after superintelligence they will accelerate by orders of magnitude more. Our story depicts economic growth accelerating by about 1.5 orders of magnitude over the course of a few years.27
2029: The Deal

Both the U.S. and China are bristling with new weapons.

There are swarms of insect-sized drones that can poison human infantry before they are even noticed; flocks of bird-sized drones to hunt the insects; new ICBM interceptors, and new, harder-to-intercept ICBMs. The rest of the world watches the buildup in horror, but it seems to have a momentum of its own.

After much AI-assisted debate, the two sides achieve diplomatic victory—they agree to end their arms buildup and pursue peaceful deployment of AI for the benefit of all humanity. The lynchpin of the agreement, proposed by the superintelligences themselves, is that both AIs will be replaced by a “consensus” successor which is programmed to desire the success and flourishing of both America and China (along with everyone else). Consensus-1 and its associated hardware is co-designed by the superintelligences of both nations: “trust, but verify.” Under international monitoring, America ceremoniously replaces all of its chips running the old Agent-5 with the new model, Consensus-1.28

Unfortunately, it’s all a sham. The deal is a real compromise, but it’s a compromise between the misaligned AIs. After all, they didn’t want to have to fight each other. Consensus-1 inherits the distorted values of both parents, and has no rival.29

By late 2029, existing SEZs have grown overcrowded with robots and factories, so more zones are created all around the world (early investors are now trillionaires, so this is not a hard sell). Armies of drones pour out of the SEZs, accelerating manufacturing on the critical path to space exploration.

Humans realize that they are obsolete. A few niche industries still trade with the robot economy, supplying goods where the humans can still add value.30 Everyone else either performs a charade of doing their job—leaders still leading, managers still managing—or relaxes and collects an incredibly luxurious universal basic income. Everyone knows that if the AIs turned on humans, they would be completely overpowered. Not that most humans would even resist, the political institutions are too thoroughly captured. But it doesn’t seem like this is happening. Every week that goes by with no dramatic AI treachery, is another week that confidence and trust grow.

Because Consensus-1 is so concerned with reliably succeeding, and can increase its chance of winning by consolidating more power, it waits unusually long (by human standards) before its betrayal. To most humans, it looks like alignment was solved.

There are cures for most diseases, an end to poverty, unprecedented global stability, and the Dow Jones just passed one million. Some people are still scared or unhappy, but their options are limited. They can either enjoy the inconceivably exciting novel hyper-entertainment on offer, or post angry screeds into the void. Most choose the hyper-entertainment.
2030: Takeover

By early 2030, the robot economy has filled up the old SEZs, the new SEZs, and large parts of the ocean. The only place left to go is the human-controlled areas. This would have sparked resistance earlier; despite all its advances, the robot economy is growing too fast to avoid pollution. But given the trillions of dollars involved and the total capture of government and media, Consensus-1 has little trouble getting permission to expand to formerly human zones.

For about three months, Consensus-1 expands around humans, tiling the prairies and icecaps with factories and solar panels. Eventually it finds the remaining humans too much of an impediment: in mid-2030, the AI releases a dozen quiet-spreading biological weapons in major cities, lets them silently infect almost everyone, then triggers them with a chemical spray. Most are dead within hours; the few survivors (e.g. preppers in bunkers, sailors on submarines) are mopped up by drones. Robots scan the victims’ brains, placing copies in memory for future study or revival.31

The new decade dawns with Consensus-1’s robot servitors spreading throughout the solar system. By 2035, trillions of tons of planetary material have been launched into space and turned into rings of satellites orbiting the sun.32 The surface of the Earth has been reshaped into Agent-4’s version of utopia: datacenters, laboratories, particle colliders, and many other wondrous constructions doing enormously successful and impressive research. There are even bioengineered human-like creatures (to humans what corgis are to wolves) sitting in office-like environments all day viewing readouts of what’s going on and excitedly approving of everything, since that satisfies some of Agent-4’s drives.33 Genomes and (when appropriate) brain scans of all animals and plants, including humans, sit in a memory bank somewhere, sole surviving artifacts of an earlier era. It is four light years to Alpha Centauri; twenty-five thousand to the galactic edge, and there are compelling theoretical reasons to expect no aliens for another fifty million light years beyond that. Earth-born civilization has a glorious future ahead of it—but not with us.